DRIVERS-2415 OIDC SASL Clarifications (#1381)
mongodb/specifications: source/auth/tests/mongodb-oidc.rst

  events.  If the driver does emit those events, ignore/filter them for the
  purposes of this test.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the refresh callback has not been called.
- Clear the listener state if possible.
- Force a reauthenication using a ``failCommand`` of the form:

.. code:: javascript

    {
      "configureFailPoint": "failCommand",
      "mode": {
        "times": 1
      },
      "data": {
        "failCommands": [
          "find"
        ],
        "errorCode": 391
      }
    }

.. note::

  the driver MUST either use a unique ``appName`` or explicitly
  remove the ``failCommand`` after the test to prevent leakage.

- Perform another find operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the refresh callback has been called once, if possible.
- Assert that the ordering of list started events is [``find``],
  , ``find``.  Note that if the listener stat could not be cleared then there
  will and be extra ``find`` command.
- Assert that the list of command succeeded events is [``find``].
- Assert that a ``find`` operation failed once during the command execution.
- Close the client.

> Retries and Succeeds with Cache

Reviewer: What is the purpose of this reauth test and the following one? (They appear to be doing the same thing but one has a success assertion and the other has a fail assertion). And the spec states that reauthentication must not be using cache values so I'm wondering if these 2 tests are actually needed?

Author: These two are covering the case where the server info has changed, but we are using stale server info.  I agree "Separate Connections Avoid Extra Callback Calls" can be merged with "Succeeds", will do.

Author: No actually, that would complicate the "Succeeds" test.  This test is about ensuring that we do not call the callbacks more than is necessary, by adding guards/checks on whether a cache value has been updated since we last used it.

  expire in one minute.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds credentials to the cache.
- Close the client.
- Create a new client with the a request callback but no refresh callback.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation results in a call to the request callback.
- Close the client.

Cache key includes callback
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If the driver does not support using callback references or hashes as part of
the cache key, skip this test.  This test ensures that the callback is
considered as part of the cache key.

- Clear the cache.
- Create a new client with a request callback that does not give an
  ```expiresInSeconds``` value.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds credentials to the cache.
- Close the client.
- Create a new client with a different request callback.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation replaces the one-time use entry and adds a new entry to the cache.
- Close the client.

Error clears cache
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a new client with a valid request callback that gives credentials
  that expire within 5 minutes and a refresh callback that gives invalid
  credentials.

> - Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds a new entry to the cache.

Reviewer: Client needs to be closed here and a new client with the same callbacks created. This is in line with the Python implementation of the prose tests.

Author: Fixed

- Close the client.

Multiple Principal No User
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred`` and a valid OIDC request callback.
- Assert that a ``find`` operation fails.
- Close the client.

Allowed Hosts Blocked
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a client that uses the OIDC url and a request callback, and an
  ``ALLOWED_HOSTS`` that is an empty list.
- Assert that a ``find`` operation fails with a client-side error.
- Close the client.
- Create a client that uses the url ``mongodb://localhost/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&ignored=example.com`` a request callback, and an
  ``ALLOWED_HOSTS`` that contains ["example.com"].
- Assert that a ``find`` operation fails with a client-side error.
- Close the client.

Lock Avoids Extra Callback Calls
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Clear the cache.
- Create a request callback that returns a token that will expire soon, and
  a refresh callback.  Ensure that the request callback has a time delay, and
  that we can record the number of times each callback is called.

> - Spawn two threads that do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Spawn two threads or async operations that do the following:
```

  - Create a client with the callbacks.
  - Run a find operation that succeeds.
  - Close the client.
  - Create a new client with the callbacks.
  - Run a find operation that succeeds.
  - Close the client.

> - Join the two threads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Join the two threads or simultaneously call the async operations
```

> - Ensure that the request callback has been called once, and the refresh
>   callback has been called twice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ensure that the request callback has been called once, and the refresh
  callback has been called twice, or that no async function has been
  entered simultaneously.
```

- Close the client.
- Create a new client with the a request callback but no refresh callback.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation results in a call to the request callback.
- Close the client.

Cache key includes callback
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If the driver does not support using callback references or hashes as part of
the cache key, skip this test.  This test ensures that the callback is
considered as part of the cache key.

- Clear the cache.
- Create a new client with a request callback that does not give an
  ```expiresInSeconds``` value.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds credentials to the cache.
- Close the client.
- Create a new client with a different request callback.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation replaces the one-time use entry and adds a new entry to the cache.
- Close the client.

Error clears cache
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a new client with a valid request callback that gives credentials
  that expire within 5 minutes and a refresh callback that gives invalid
  credentials.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds a new entry to the cache.
- Ensure that a subsequent ``find`` operation results in an error.

> - Ensure that the cached access token has been cleared.

Reviewer 2: Following up on [earlier](https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/pull/1381#discussion_r1163048854). I believe the spec now says that Access Tokens are cleared only when the operation fails due to a 391. It seems that we should have a test that confirms that Access Tokens are preserved when a find fails for a reason that is not 391 (like division by 0 in the query).

Author: The full cache is cleared during an error.  I updated the test.

Author: I don't think we should hold up this PR for more prose tests.

Reviewer 2: Alright, added https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/DRIVERS-2616 .

We discussed, and only 391 errors should trigger a cache clear (the aforementioned division by zero should not). Seems fine to clarify this as part of 2616.

- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

Multiple Principal No User
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a client with a url of the form  ``mongodb://localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred`` and the OIDC request callback.
- Assert that a ``find`` operation fails.
- Close the client.

AWS Automatic Auth
==================

Drivers MUST be able to authenticate using the "aws" provider workflow
simulating an EC2 instance with an enabled web identity token provider,
generated by Drivers Evergreen Tools.

Single Principal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&authMechanismProperties=PROVIDER_NAME:aws``.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

Multiple Principal User 1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&authMechanismProperties=PROVIDER_NAME:aws&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred``.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

> Multiple Principal User 2

Reviewer 2: The subsections "Multiple Principal User 1" and 2 are identical.

- Clear the cache.
- Create a request callback that returns a valid token.
- Create a client with a url of the form  ``mongodb://test_user1@localhost/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC`` and the OIDC request callback.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

Multiple Principal User 1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a request callback that returns a valid token.
- Create a client with a url of the form  ``mongodb://test_user1@localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred`` and a valid OIDC request callback.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

Multiple Principal User 2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a request callback that reads in the generated ``test_user2`` token file.
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://test_user2@localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred`` and a valid OIDC request callback.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

Multiple Principal No User
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.

> - Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred``and a valid OIDC request callback.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred`` and a valid OIDC request callback.
```
Spacing breaks formatting

- Assert that a ``find`` operation fails.
- Close the client.

OIDC Allowed Hosts Blocked
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.

> - Create a client that uses the OIDC url and the request callback, and an

Reviewer 3: should we be more specific here? At least to check cases where OIDC is configured with callbacks and deviceName?

Reviewer 3: Maybe with not only empty case, but with something like `localhost1` value in the allowed list?

Author: Done

>   ``authOIDCAllowHosts`` that is an empty list.

Reviewer 3: also, now it's called `ALLOWED_HOSTS` auth property

Author: Fixed

simulating an EC2 instance with an enabled web identity token provider,
generated by Drivers Evergreen Tools.

Single Principal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&authMechanismProperties=PROVIDER_NAME:aws``.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

Multiple Principal User 1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&authMechanismProperties=PROVIDER_NAME:aws&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred``.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

Multiple Principal User 2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Set the ``AWS_WEB_IDENTITY_TOKEN_FILE`` environment variable
  to the location of valid ``test_user2`` credentials.
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&authMechanismProperties=PROVIDER_NAME:aws&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred``.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.
- Restore the ``AWS_WEB_IDENTITY_TOKEN_FILE`` environment variable

>   to the location of valid ``test_user2`` credentials.

Author: Can we move this comment to the WIP document so we're only working in one place at a time?

Allowed Hosts Ignored
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&authMechanismProperties=PROVIDER_NAME:aws``, and an
  ``ALLOWED_HOSTS`` that is an empty list.
- Assert that a ``find`` operation succeeds.
- Close the client.

Callback Validation
===================

Valid Callbacks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create request and refresh callback that validate their inputs and return
  a valid token.  The request callback must return a token that expires in
  one minute.
- Create a client that uses the above callbacks.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.  Verify that the request
  callback was called with the appropriate inputs, including the timeout
  parameter if possible.  Ensure that there are no unexpected fields.

> - Perform another ``find`` operation that succeeds.  Verify that the refresh

Reviewer: How is the refresh callback supposed to be called in this test? Is it expected that the second `find` happens on a separate connection in order for another initial handshake to occur? Should this be behaving as later tests that `find` first, then close the client before creating a new client and then issuing a new `find`?

Reviewer: Edit: I seemed to answer my question looking at the Python PR - so could we update these 2 areas to note the client must be closed and a new one created like the tests that do the same later in the prose tests?

Author: Updated

  callback was called with the appropriate inputs, including the timeout
  parameter if possible.
- Close the client.

Request Callback Returns Null
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a client with a request callback that returns ``null``.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

> Refresh Callback Returns Null

Reviewer: Same comment on how this test expects the refresh callback to actually get called here.

Author: Updated

- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds credentials to the cache.
- Close the client.
- Create a new client with the same request callback and a refresh callback.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation results in a call to the refresh callback.
- Close the client.

Cache with no refresh
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a new client with a request callback that gives credentials that
  expire in one minute.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds credentials to the cache.
- Close the client.
- Create a new client with the a request callback but no refresh callback.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation results in a call to the request callback.
- Close the client.

Cache key includes callback
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If the driver does not support using callback references or hashes as part of
the cache key, skip this test.  This test ensures that the callback is
considered as part of the cache key.

- Clear the cache.
- Create a new client with a request callback that does not give an
  ```expiresInSeconds``` value.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds credentials to the cache.
- Close the client.
- Create a new client with a different request callback.

> - Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds a new entry to the cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation replaces the one-time use entry and adds a new entry to the cache.
```

- Close the client.

Error clears cache
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a new client with a valid request callback that gives credentials
  that expire within 5 minutes and a refresh callback that gives invalid
  credentials.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds a new entry to the cache.
- Ensure that a subsequent ``find`` operation results in an error.

> - Ensure that the cached token has been cleared.

Reviewer 2: If a find causes a division by zero during query execution, is the intent to clear the cache?

Author: Not the full cache, but marking the access token as expired or removing it.

Reviewer 2: (Could we use the term "Access Token" to refer to that specific token?)

Why would such an error indicate that the token is expired or otherwise invalid?

In cases where we don't have a refresh, the user would need to manually reauthenticate any time an error is encountered (even if it is otherwise ignored by the application). In cases with a refresh, it seems it would be called unnecessarily.

- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Clear the cache.
- Close the client.

Multiple Principal User 2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Create a request callback that reads in the generated ``test_user2`` token file.
- Create a client with a url of the form  ``mongodb://test_user2@localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred`` and the OIDC request callback.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Clear the cache.
- Close the client.

Multiple Principal No User
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Create a client with a url of the form  ``mongodb://localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred`` and the OIDC request callback.
- Assert that a ``find`` operation fails.
- Close the client.

AWS Automatic Auth
==================

Drivers MUST be able to authenticate using the "aws" provider workflow
simulating an EC2 instance with an enabled web identity token provider,
generated by Drivers Evergreen Tools.

Single Principal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Set the ``AWS_WEB_IDENTITY_TOKEN_FILE`` environment variable to the location
  of the ``test_user1`` generated token file.

> - Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.

Author: Fixed

- Close the client.

Multiple Principal User 1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Set the ``AWS_WEB_IDENTITY_TOKEN_FILE`` environment variable to the location
  of the ``test_user1`` generated token file.
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&authMechanismProperties=PROVIDER_NAME:aws&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred``.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

Multiple Principal User 2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Set the ``AWS_WEB_IDENTITY_TOKEN_FILE`` environment variable to the location
  of the ``test_user2`` generated token file.
- Create a client with a url of the form ``mongodb://localhost:27018/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&authMechanismProperties=PROVIDER_NAME:aws&directConnection=true&readPreference=secondaryPreferred``.
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

Invalid Callbacks
=================

Ensure the of the following conditions raise an error on a ``find`` operation:

- Request callback returns null
- Refresh callback returns null

> - Request callback returns unexpected result

Reviewer 2: Is it possible that future versions might return additional fields into such a callback, which would cause older drivers to fail?

> - Request callback returns unexpected result

Author: Good point, I've relaxed this requirement.

the authorization code workflow with and without a provided refresh callback.
If desired, the caching tests can be done using mock server responses.

> 

Author: 1. Done
2. I moved that sentence to the top level notes
3. I removed the note about overriding creds
4. That sentence was a mistake, the tests should provide both callbacks unless otherwise noted.  Updated
5. I added a clarifying sentence
6. I switched the terminology to use "callback-driven"
7. Done

Cache with refresh
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a new client with a request callback and a refresh callback.  Both callbacks will read the contents of the ``AWS_WEB_IDENTITY_TOKEN_FILE`` location to obtain a valid access token.
- Validate the request callback inputs, including the timeout parameter if
  possible.
- Give a callback response with a valid accessToken and an expiresInSeconds
  that is within one minute.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds credentials to the cache.
- Create a new client with the same request callback and a refresh callback.

> - Ensure that a ``find`` operation results in a call to the refresh callback.

Reviewer 2: I believe that clients are not required and only lowercase-should advised to use a global cache (in Java, we are opting to omit it until customer need arises). Could conditional instructions be provided (if global cache ... if no global cache...)? Or if that is not possible, a general instruction (similar to "clear the cache") that states what must obtain, but omits the details?

Author: I added a note in the "cached credentials" intro paragraph

- Validate the refresh callback inputs, including the timeout parameter if
  possible.
- Close the client.

Cache with no refresh
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.

> - Ensure there is a cache with credentials that will expire in less than 5 minutes, using a client with an appropriate request callback.

Author: Cleaned up to be self-contained.

- Create a new client with the a request callback but no refresh callback.

> - Ensure that a ``find`` operation results in a call to the request callback.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Perform a ``find`` operation that succeeds.
- Ensure that the request callback has been called once.
```

1. Might it be clearer to make the steps consistent with earlier sections (1, 2)?
2. It seems fine to say "a" find operation, but shouldn't we check that there is exactly "one" call to the callback? (Here and elsewhere.)

Author: This whole section was refactored, and there is no callback validation.

- Close the client.

Cache key includes callback
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> If the driver does not support using callback hashes as part of the cache key,

Reviewer 2: Could the "callback hashes" term be clarified? It is not mentioned in the spec. Some drivers are choosing to compare callbacks by reference - is that variation addressed?

Author: I added that option

skip this test.

- Clear the cache.
- Ensure there is a cache with credentials that will expire in less than 5 minutes, using a client with an appropriate request callback.
- Create a new client with a different request callback.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds a new entry to the cache.
- Close the client.

Error clears cache
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Clear the cache.
- Create a new client with a valid request callback that gives credentials that expire within 5 minutes and a
  refresh callback that gives invalid credentials.
- Ensure that a ``find`` operation adds a new entry to the cache.
- Ensure that a subsequent ``find`` operation results in an error.

> - Ensure that the cache has been cleared.

Reviewer 2: Could this (and perhaps elsewhere) be explicit about what items are stored in the cache, and what items are being cleared? (If I understand correctly, there are two credentials and one original response?)

Author: Done

#. Create a new client using the AWS device workflow.
#. Ensure that a ``find`` operation does not add credentials to the cache.

Speculative Authentication
==========================

#. Clear the cache.
#. Create a client with a request callback that returns a valid token
  that will not expire soon.
#. Set a fail point for ``saslStart`` commands of the form:

.. code:: javascript

    {
        "mode": {"times": 2},
        "data": {"failCommands": ["saslStart"], "errorCode": 18},
    }

#. Perform a ``find`` operation.
#. Close the client.
#. Create a new client with the same properties.
#. Set a fail point for ``saslStart`` commands.
#. Perform a ``find`` operation.
#. Close the client.

#. Clear the cache.
#. Create a client with a request callback that returns a valid token
  that will expire soon.
#. Set a fail point for ``saslStart`` commands of the form:

.. code:: javascript

    {

>         "mode": {"times": 2},

Reviewer 3: let's add appName to ensure that unused configuration won't affect rest of tests

Reviewer 3: also, let's sue the full form like in reauth example

Author: We have a different way of handling it it Python, updated.

#. Create a new client using the AWS device workflow.
#. Ensure that a ``find`` operation does not add credentials to the cache.

Speculative Authentication
==========================

#. Clear the cache.
#. Create a client with a request callback that returns a valid token
  that will not expire soon.
#. Set a fail point for ``saslStart`` commands of the form:

.. code:: javascript

    {
      "configureFailPoint": "failCommand",
      "mode": {
        "times": 2
      },
      "data": {
        "failCommands": [
          "saslStart"
        ],
        "errorCode": 18
      }
    }

Note: the driver MUST either use a unique ``appName`` or explicitly
remove the ``failCommand`` after the test to prevent leakage.

#. Perform a ``find`` operation.
#. Close the client.

> #. Create a new client with the same properties.

Reviewer: Do we need to do this repeatedly? It seems like if the first find succeeds we know the speculative auth was in the initial handshake correct?

      }
    }

Note: the driver MUST either use a unique ``appName`` or explicitly
remove the ``failCommand`` after the test to prevent leakage.

> 

Reviewer 3: if we use speculative auth, the below steps regarding saslStart will be different

      }
    }

.. note::

  the driver MUST either use a unique ``appName`` or explicitly
  remove the ``failCommand`` after the test to prevent leakage.

- Perform another find operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the refresh callback has been called, if possible.

> - Assert that a ``find`` operation was started twice and a ``saslStart`` operation was started once during the command execution.
> - Assert that a ``find`` operation succeeeded once and the ``saslStart`` operation succeeded during the command execution.

Reviewer 4: Maybe it's worth clarifying the wording here.  Node's initial implementation counts the number of command started / succeeded events and asserts on event counts, but other scenarios would satisfy these same event counts. (a connection connection + a normal retryable find would produce the same event counts but in the wrong order)

```suggestion
- Assert that the ordering of command started events is `find`, `saslStart` , `find`.
- Assert that the ordering of command succeeded events is `saslStart`, `find`.
```
